After Travel

If you traveled and feel sick, particularly if you have a fever, talk to a healthcare provider and tell them about your travel. 

If you need medical care abroad, see Getting Health Care During Travel.\

What can travelers do to prevent HIV?

Talk with your health care provider about PrEP or pre-exposure prophylaxis. It is usually a pill or a shot. PrEP is most effective when it is prescribed by your healthcare provider
Before having sex for the first time with a new partner, you and your partner should talk about your sexual and drug-use history, disclose your HIV status, and get tested for HIV and other sexually transmitted infections.
If you have sex, use condoms the right way every time you have vaginal, oral, or anal sex, from start to finish.
Do not inject drugs or share needles or other devices that can break the skin. If you do inject drugs, use only new, sterile syringes and needles.
If you get tattoos, piercings, or acupuncture abroad, make sure a new, sterile needle is used each time.
If you get medical or dental care abroad, make sure the equipment is unused or properly sterilized.
If you have HIV and are traveling, your destination may increase your risk of getting opportunistic infections or more severe illnesses from infections like travelers’ diarrhea. Bring enough of your medications to last your entire trip since not all countries have all HIV medication.

Consult your doctor or travel medicine specialist at least 4 weeks before leaving as you may not be eligible for certain travel vaccines required at your destination, or you may need to take additional precautions.

Check the Department of State websiteExternal Link for any restrictions on travel for people with HIV at your destination

What is HIV?

HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) is a virus that attacks the body’s immune system. It is spread through certain body fluids, including blood, sexual fluids (like semen and vaginal or rectal fluids) and breast milk. Most people get HIV from having unprotected sex (including vaginal or anal sex) with someone who has HIV, or from sharing needles or other drug injection equipment with someone who has HIV.

Early symptoms of HIV infection may include cough, body aches, headaches, nasal congestion, and sore throat. These symptoms usually go away on their own and can be mistaken for flu-like illness. Some people may have no early symptoms at all and may feel healthy. The only way to know for sure whether you have HIV is to get tested.

Over time, HIV infection damages the immune system, making it harder for the body to fight off infections and other diseases, including heart disease, kidney disease, liver disease, and cancer. Left untreated, HIV infection can lead to AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome). AIDS is the most severe phase of HIV infection. People with AIDS have such badly damaged immune systems that they get severe infections that don’t normally infect healthy people, called opportunistic infections, and eventually the infection leads to death. No effective cure exists, but with early diagnosis and proper medical care, HIV can be managed and controlled.

Who is at risk?

Travelers are generally at low risk for getting HIV unless they engage in activities that could put them at risk, such as having unprotected sex or sharing needles.

A person can get HIV by being stuck with a contaminated needle or another sharp object, though this is more of a risk for healthcare workers. Some low-income countries may not adequately screen their blood supplies or properly sterilize medical equipment used in medical clinics, dental clinics, and hospitals. There is a small chance that travelers to these countries who receive medical care could get infected.

HIV infection affects people globally. Sub-Saharan Africa remains the most affected part of the world. Still, other regions significantly affected by HIV include Asia and the Pacific, Latin America, the Caribbean, Eastern Europe, and Central Asia.

Best Ways to Treat HIV Symptoms

You have HIV. Now, you’re getting symptoms you’ve never had before. Perhaps you’re dropping weight for no reason or can’t seem to shake a nagging cough.

Why are you feeling sick?

It’s possible your HIV isn’t under control. That’s most likely to happen if you’re not on antiretroviral therapy (ART), medicines that fight the virus. However, it can also happen if you aren’t taking ART correctly, or if the drugs aren't working for you.
When HIV grows uncontrollably, the amount of virus in your blood goes up and hurts your immune system. It destroys cells called CD4s. Without enough of these, your body has a hard time fighting common infections and other health problems that it could normally handle easily. 

Call your doctor if you get new symptoms. They can get to the bottom of what’s wrong and find ways to help you feel better.

HIV Symptoms and Treatment
Weight loss:  Shedding pounds without trying is an obvious sign that your HIV may be going in the wrong direction. Untreated HIV itself or infections you get because of it can make you lose weight.  Plus, if you’re sick, you may not feel like eating.

If you lose 10% or more of your body weight (like 15 pounds if you weigh 150 pounds), you could have what’s called wasting syndrome. You also have diarrhea, weakness, and fever for about a month. This mostly affects people with advanced HIV.

It’s important to try to put weight back on. In addition to taking your HIV medications, a few things can help:

Talk to a dietitian to make sure your diet is balanced and gives you the calories you need.
Build up your muscle mass with workouts like weightlifting or resistance exercises, like pushups, planks, and squats.
Try high-protein supplements. (First, ask your doctor or dietitian if you need them.)
Treat infections that may cause diarrhea or loss of appetite.
Your doctor may prescribe medicines to help with wasting syndrome, called megestrol acetate (Megace) and dronabinol (Marinol). 
Skin problems: Dry, itchy skin is a common issue for people whose immune systems are damaged from HIV. Skin infections like impetigo or tinea can be a problem, too.

Treatments include:

Antifungal or antibacterial creams
Steroids and antihistamines
Moisturizers 
Molluscum contagiosum is a viral infection that causes small, flesh-colored bumps on the skin. The virus can grow out of control in people with HIV, so see a dermatologist for treatment right away. 

Painful, blistering rash: It could be shingles if you’ve ever had chickenpox -- the same virus causes both. Usually, shingles affect people over age 60. But if you have HIV, you can get it even if you’re younger.

It’s important to see your doctor if you think you have shingles. Antiviral medicines can help you get over it more quickly -- but you need to start taking them as soon as possible.

Other treatments include:

Pain medicine
Calamine lotion, colloidal oatmeal baths, or wet compresses to relieve itching
Fever: Running a temperature usually means your body is fighting an infection. Your doctor may do some tests to figure out what’s causing your fever so they can decide how to treat the problem.

In addition to following your doctor's advice, do these things to bring down a fever:

Take acetaminophen or ibuprofen
Use cold compresses
Nagging cough: A cough isn’t always a sign of something serious. But one that hangs around for weeks can be.

People with low CD4 counts are more likely to get a lung infection called pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP). It can cause a dry cough, shortness of breath, and make you feel very tired.

Be sure you talk to your doctor if you have the symptoms of this infection -- without treatment, it can be deadly.  You may need to be admitted to the hospital for diagnosis and treatment.

People with weak immune systems are more likely to get tuberculosis (TB). You may bring up lots of phlegm when you cough and have chest pain, fever, and weight loss, too. If tests show that you have TB, you’ll need to take antibiotics for several months.

Night sweats:  Do you wake up in the middle of the night drenched in sweat? It can be a symptom of HIV itself or other infections (like TB). The sweating will stop when your doctor figures out what’s causing the problem and treats it.

What else can you do in the meantime?

Make your bedroom as cool as possible by turning down the temperature and running fans.
Buy moisture-wicking pajamas and sheets.
Mouth problems: It’s not unusual for people with HIV to have sores in their mouths. Infections can cause problems like thrush or cold sores as the disease gets worse.

These conditions can make it painful to chew and swallow your food. Your doctor may suggest medicines to fight the infection and the pain.

Long-lasting diarrhea: People with weak immune systems can get infections that cause diarrhea. It can last for a few weeks. Your doctor will do a thorough workup to figure out the problem.

To control symptoms, your doctor may suggest:

Anti-diarrhea meds to slow down the waste in your intestines and keep you from going as often
Soft, easy-to-digest foods like bananas, rice, and potatoes
Plenty of water, tea, and other healthy drinks to stay hydrated
Let your doctor know if your diarrhea gets worse or you get a fever, vomiting, or pain.

Get Treated to Prevent Symptoms
The symptoms and illnesses described above are likely the result of advanced HIV, which means that the virus has been growing unchecked in your body for months to years.

If you’re not on ART or you’re not taking it exactly as you’re supposed to, now is the time to start taking it correctly. These medications will lower the amount of the virus in your blood so your immune system can recover.  Even people with uncontrolled HIV can get the right treatment and go on to live a healthy life. Make sure to follow your doctor’s advice regarding your HIV medicine and other medicines prescribed for your specific conditions.

You may need to change your meds if you can’t stand the side effects or if they’re not controlling your disease well. But don’t stop taking them before you talk to your doctor.

Effects of Antiretroviral Drugs on the Body

Antiretroviral therapy helps people who have HIV live longer, healthier lives and lowers their risk of spreading the virus. The drugs can have side effects, many of which go away with time. Overall, the benefits outweigh the risks.

There are several kinds of antiretroviral drugs, and your doctor might combine them in different ways. Side effects can vary from drug to drug or from person to person.

Common side effects of these drugs include:

Upset stomach and vomiting
Diarrhea
Trouble sleeping
Headache
Rash
Dizziness
Fatigue
Talk to your doctor if you have any of these problems. They might be able to change your medication or give you something else to deal with the effects.

Make your health a priority. Take your medications as directed, and let your doctor know about any changes or new symptoms.

HIV Effects on the Circulatory System

Several things make your chances of heart-related problems go up. Because HIV affects your immune system, your body will be inflamed as it tries to fight the infection, like it’s on a constant simmer. This kind of inflammation has been linked to heart disease.

Some drugs you take for HIV can also make heart disease more likely. They can cause insulin resistance, which makes you more likely to get diabetes, and problems breaking down fats. Diabetes, in turn, raises your risk of heart disease. You might need medicines to control your blood sugar and cholesterol.

If you smoke, quit. Eat a variety of vegetables and fruits, plenty of whole grains, and foods with omega-3 fatty acids. Choose lean cuts of meat and low-fat dairy products. Exercise, like taking a brisk walk, for 20 to 30 minutes most days of the week.

If you're carrying extra weight, losing as little as 5 or 10 pounds could make a big difference.

HIV Effects on the Digestive System

More than half of people who have AIDS report digestive symptoms as the virus or an opportunistic infection targets the walls of their intestines. Diarrhea is the most common one. Over time, the virus can change how your digestive tract works and even how it looks.

Liver

Some HIV medications can damage your liver. Many people with HIV also have a form of inflammation called hepatitis.

Limit how much alcohol you drink, and don't use recreational drugs. Having diabetes, high cholesterol, or triglycerides and being overweight can lead to fatty liver disease, so keep an eye on the carbs, fats, and calories you eat each day.

Talk to your doctor about getting the hepatitis A and hepatitis B vaccines. There’s no vaccine against hepatitis C, but you should get tested for it.

Get regular blood tests to catch any liver problems early.

Mouth

Your mouth might be one of the first places where you notice signs of HIV. Things like dry mouth, fungal infections, gum disease, cold sores, and canker sores can make chewing or swallowing painful. If they go on too long, you might not be able to take your HIV medication or get the nutrients you need.

Good dental habits can help prevent these issues, so brush and floss regularly. See your dentist for checkups, and tell them if you’re having problems. Most mouth conditions tied to HIV are treatable.

HIV Effects on the Eyes

Some eye problems are mild, but others can be severe enough to cause blindness. Some of the most common are infections that can lead to bleeding in your retina (the tissue at the back of your eye) and retinal detachment. About 7 in 10 people with untreated AIDS will have AIDS-related trouble with their eyes, usually because of cytomegalovirus.

You may not have any symptoms until the problems are far along, so if you have advanced HIV, it's important to get regular eye exams. Call your doctor if your vision changes, including if:

You get blurry or double vision.
Colors don't look right.
You see spots.
You have watery or red eyes.
You're sensitive to light.
Your eyes hurt.

Effects of HIV on the Body

HIV attacks your immune system, making it harder for you to fight off things that can make you sick. As the virus weakens your natural defenses, you might notice signs all over your body. But if you start antiretroviral therapy (ART) medicines early in an HIV infection, you won’t have most of these problems.

These drugs can also have some side effects. You'll need to keep an eye out for problems and take steps to prevent or slow them.

HIV Effects on the Immune System
Your immune system has many types of white blood cells that fight infection. HIV gets inside a kind called CD4 cells and makes copies of itself. The virus kills the cell, and the new viruses go off to find more.

Your body responds by making more CD4 cells, but after a while, it can’t keep up with the virus. This makes your immune system weak. You’re more likely to get sick, even from common germs. Infections last longer, are more severe, and might come back more often.

If you follow your doctor’s directions with ART, it knocks out HIV, stopping it from infecting more CD4 cells and from weakening your immune system.

HIV Effects on the Kidneys

High blood pressure and diabetes are both related to HIV, and both are major causes of kidney disease. The healthy diet and exercise habits that are good for your heart will help keep your blood pressure and blood sugar under control. That helps protect your kidneys, too.

Some HIV medications can damage your kidneys. If you already have kidney problems, your doctor may want to avoid those drugs or keep a close eye on their effects.

Your doctor will need to check your kidneys regularly because you might not notice the signs of kidney disease.

HIV Effects on the Nervous System

About half of people with AIDS have nerve problems related to the virus. Infection or inflammation can damage your spinal cord or brain and keep your nerve cells from working the way they should. Some medications can also affect your nervous system.

Brain

Inflammation in your brain and spinal cord can lead to confusion and other thinking problems as well as weakness, headaches, seizures, and balance problems.

When AIDS is far along, you might get dementia and have problems remembering things.

Having HIV can also affect your mental health. Many people living with it have depression or anxiety. Mental health professionals and support groups can help you work through your concerns and manage your life with HIV.

Nerves

The opportunistic infection cytomegalovirus can attack your nerves, making it hard for you to control your arms and legs or your bladder.
It’s common for tiny holes to form in spinal fibers when people with AIDS don’t get treatment. This is called vacuolar myelopathy and causes trouble walking.

HIV or the drugs that treat it can also damage nerves all over your body, causing neuropathy. You might have pain, numbness, weakness, burning, stiffness, or tingling.

Antiretroviral therapy to treat HIV can lower your risk of getting these conditions or complications. If a medication is causing the problems, your doctor might switch you to a different one.

HIV Effects on the Skeletal System

People who have the virus tend to lose bone faster than people who don’t. Your bones may get brittle and can break more easily. Your hips, especially, may hurt and feel weak.

Things that might cause this include the virus itself, the inflammation it causes, the medicines you take to treat HIV or related illnesses (like steroids or antacids), and an unhealthy lifestyle. It might also be from a vitamin D deficiency, which is common in people who have HIV.

To help keep your bones in good shape:

Make sure you get plenty of calcium and vitamin D.
Exercise in ways that put weight on your bones, like walking or lifting weights.
Don't smoke, and limit how much alcohol you drink.
Ask your doctor to check your vitamin D level.
Talk to your doctor about supplements or other medications to help your bones.

HIV Effects on the Skin

Many people get a skin rash in the first stage of an HIV infection. It usually goes away without treatment in days or weeks. Over time, a number of things might cause more rashes. It’s always important to let your doctor know about a rash, because it might be a sign of a serious problem, or an HIV medication could be causing it.

People who have HIV are more likely to get viral infections. Herpes zoster, herpes simplex, and Molluscum contagiosum can cause rashes or blisters.

Kaposi’s sarcoma causes lesions, patches, or nodules that are a different color from your skin. Sometimes, you can also get lesions on your internal organs. These may be life-threatening.

How Can You Prevent an HIV Infection?

More than 1 in 5 young adults between the ages of 18-30 are concerned that they’re at risk for HIV. You may be especially worried if you have recently had unprotected sex with someone who tested HIV positive.

Sometimes, the danger isn’t as great as it seems. A woman who has unprotected vaginal sex with an HIV-positive man, for example, has only an 8 in 10,000 chance for each encounter. But if they have unprotected anal intercourse, their odds become much higher. Other things like sharing needles also increase the danger. But if you take a sip from the same glass as someone who has HIV, there’s virtually no risk.

Here’s what you need to know to protect yourself:
Don’t Worry About Casual Contact
If you know or live with someone with HIV, you don’t need to worry about getting the virus through day-to-day contact. You can hug them, shake their hand, use the same toilet, drink from the same glass, or even kiss them on the mouth without worry. While HIV spreads through blood and body fluids like semen, this doesn’t happen with saliva. You also can’t get HIV if you eat a meal made by someone who’s HIV positive. Even if small amounts of HIV-infected blood got in the food, the virus can’t survive long outside a body, and your stomach acid would destroy it.

It’s best not to share the same toothbrush or to eat food that’s been already chewed by someone with HIV. Although very rare, there have been reports of infection in both cases. This is because if there’s any blood in the infected person’s mouth, it can enter yours if you have an open wound.


Have Safe Sex
Condoms are the best way to prevent HIV because the virus can't pass through the barrier. But you must use them correctly each and every time you have sex. Latex condoms give you the best protection. If you’re allergic to them, use polyurethane (plastic) or polyisoprene (synthetic rubber) ones. Stay away from condoms with a natural membrane like lambskin. They have small holes in them, so they can’t block HIV.
Use a water- or silicone-based lubricant to lessen the chance that a condom will break during sex. Don’t use oil-based lubricants like Vaseline or mineral or massage oils. They can weaken the condom and make it more likely to break.

It’s not likely that you’ll get HIV from giving oral sex to your partner unless you have an open sore in your mouth, like an ulcer or a bleeding gum. But to be safe, have your partner use a condom or dental dam -- a thin, square piece of latex or silicone that is placed over your partner’s vulva or anus when you have oral sex.
Stay Away From Illegal Drugs
You’re at high risk for HIV if you share needles or syringes with others. The safest thing to do is to not share needles. Use only new, sterile needles. Some drugstores even sell them without a prescription. If you can’t get fresh needles, you can clean used needles with bleach, but you still have a chance of getting HIV from them. Though injected illegal drugs are the most dangerous, any type of recreational drug use can raise your risk. This is because they lower your inhibitions and make it more likely you’ll have unprotected sex. This raises your chances of getting HIV. If you do use drugs, always carry condoms.
Protect Yourself With PrEP
You may be in a situation that makes you more likely to get HIV. You may share needles, or you’re in a relationship with someone who’s HIV-positive. If your partner takes HIV medication and has undetectable virus, they are unlikely to give it to you. But you may be at risk if they don’t take their medication consistently or don’t know what their viral load is.

You can protect yourself by taking a daily pill to help avoid infection. It’s called pre-exposure prophylaxis, or PrEP.  There are a few options. The pill, Truvada contains two drugs, emtricitabine and tenofovir. These are antiretrovirals, which means they don’t allow the virus to take hold and spread through your body.
If you have unprotected sex with someone who’s HIV positive, your chance of getting HIV drops by about 99% if you take PrEP daily. It doesn’t work as well if you inject drugs, but it still lowers your chances by at least 74%. For it to work this well, you need to take it every day. 

A similar drug, Descovy, is approved for PrEP, but it’s not recommended for women having receptive vaginal sex. 

The medication cabotegravir (Apretude, Vocabria) are more recent approvals. Vocabria is also taken in pill form. Apretude is is given first as two initiation injections administered one month apart, and then every two months thereafter. It has proven to be 90% effective.

If you want to take PrEP, talk to your doctor. You’ll need to take an HIV test first to make sure that you don’t already have the virus. You’ll need to have tests every 3 months while on this medication. Many health insurance plans cover it. If you don’t have insurance, your doctor can help you find a medication assistance plan.

How Do You Catch HIV?

We've come a long way from the days when people were so worried they might catch HIV that they avoided people with it altogether. Still, some people may not be sure exactly what's safe and what's not.

It's true that HIV is a virus, like a cold or the flu -- but it doesn't spread the same way. In fact, it's a lot harder to catch. You can only get it when certain fluids from someone who's infected get into your body.

So, how does that happen?
From a Hug?
No. HIV is only spread through specific body fluids: blood, semen, pre-seminal fluid (secreted from penis before ejaculation), vaginal and rectal fluid, and breast milk. Hugging and shaking hands are safe.

From Kissing?
It's possible, but it hardly ever happens. HIV isn't spread through saliva.

But if you kiss someone who's infected and has bleeding gums or sores, you could get the virus if you also have cuts or sores around or in your mouth -- because of the blood-to-blood contact.

From Someone's Cough or Sneeze?
No, the virus doesn't travel through air.
From Someone's Tears, Sweat, Vomit, or Pee?
Not like that. Sweat and tears don't carry HIV. And even though they might have a trace of blood, there have been no reported cases of HIV from vomit or pee.

From Vaginal Sex?
Yes, and either partner can get it!

Women can get HIV through the tissue that lines their vagina and cervix. The virus can get into men through the opening of their penis or through a small cut or sore on it. Women are at higher risk if they are the one being penetrated.
Effective HIV drugs (antiretroviral therapy) will greatly reduce the chances that an HIV infected person can give HIV to their partner in this way. However, even when HIV drugs are used, use a condom to cut your chances of the virus passing between you, as well as getting any other sexually transmitted infections.
From Anal Sex?
Yes. Either partner can get it from the other, but ther person being penetrated is at higher risk.

And while condoms work to protect you if they stay in place, they're more likely to break during anal sex.It is smart to use a condom-safe lubricant (that is not oil-based) to reduce friction and the risk of condoms breaking.

Again, effective antretroviral therapy in the HIV-infected partner will reduce the chances of passing HIV. However, condoms should be used to prevent HIV and other sexually transmitted infections.

From Oral Sex?
It's much less likely than when you have anal or vaginal sex. Still, it can happen.

The person who ends up with semen or vaginal fluid in their mouth is at greater risk. Again, use a condom, latex barrier, or dental dam.

From a Toilet Seat or Water Fountain?
No, for several reasons. First, there's not likely to be the right kind of body fluid on public surfaces. And if there were, the virus would probably die before you got to it; it can't live long outside a body. And it would still have to get through your skin or into you somehow.
From Drinking Out of the Same Glass?
That's not a problem. Sharing dishes, glasses, and eating utensils is safe. Remember, HIV isn't in saliva, and it dies quickly once it's outside the body.

From Eating Food Made by a Person With HIV?
Probably not, even if there are traces of blood or another fluid in it. The virus can't survive the cooking process or your stomach acid.

Passing HIV through eating has happened only in rare cases, when children ate food that was already chewed by someone with the virus.

From Mosquitoes or Ticks?
Nope, not through insects.

From Sharing Needles?
Yes, and it's not just the needles. Any of the supplies for preparing drugs for injection -- syringes, bottle caps, spoons, or containers -- could have the virus if someone with HIV used it first.

From a Tattoo or a Body Piercing?
In theory, yes, if the needles were used on someone with HIV before you and then not sterilized. But the CDC says no cases have been reported of someone getting the virus this way.
From a Blood Transfusion?
Again, theoretically yes, but in the U.S., there's little risk. Careful testing makes sure that blood bank supplies are HIV-free.

From Touching an Open Wound on Someone Who Has HIV?
Maybe. Body fluids like blood can pass through broken skin, wounds, or mucous membranes. But it's very rare.

If Someone With HIV Bites, Scratches, or Spits on You?
It's possible if a bite or scratch breaks your skin, but (yes, again) it's extremely rare. And if your skin doesn't break, there's no chance.
Getting spit on is unpleasant and messy, but not a danger as far as catching HIV.

From Your Mom (If You're a Baby)?
Women infected with HIV can pass the virus to their child during pregnancy or while they are giving birth, or through their breast milk. The chances are greatly reduced, however if the mother is taking effective HIV drugs (antiretroviral therapy) throughout their pregnancy, labor, and delivery.

Living With HIV and AIDS

The first documented AIDS case in the United States was in 1981 (in retrospect, some cases occurred earlier in the world). Since then, about 35 million people in the world have died from illnesses related to the disease. Millions of children have been orphaned because of it.

Now, combination drug treatments have turned HIV into a long-term infection that you can manage, even if HIV has progressed to AIDS. At the end of 2017, about 37 million people in the world were living with HIV, including about 2 million kids. About 22 million of these persons were receiving these life-saving treatments. When you work closely with your doctors and stick to your treatment plan, you can live a long time and expect a near normal life expectancy.

It can take HIV many years to damage your immune system enough to make you vulnerable to certain diseases, such as a form of skin cancer called Kaposi's sarcoma. These other "opportunistic infections" are signs that you have AIDS, since people with healthy immune systems rarely get them. The HIV treatments, if taken early, can prevent progression to AIDS.

Because there are drugs you can take for it, some groups of people believe they don't have to be worried about HIV anymore, even though they're more likely to get the virus. But treatments don't change the fact that HIV is a potentially life-threatening illness.

HIV and AIDS medications can be expensive. Despite successful programs to treat people with HIV in resource-limited countries, many people in the world living with the virus and its complications still have a hard time getting the medicine they need.

Stages of HIV infection

About a month after you get HIV, you might feel like you have the flu. This is the first stage, called primary or acute HIV infection. Symptoms include:

Fever
Skin rash
Sore throat
Fatigue
Swollen lymph nodes

The next stage is called clinical latency, or chronic infection. You might have no symptoms, or only mild ones, for 10 years or more.

Without treatment, as HIV keeps multiplying inside your body, you’ll move into the third stage, which is AIDS. A person who has HIV is diagnosed with AIDS when they have fewer than 200 CD4 cells per cubic millimeter of blood or when they get what’s called an AIDS-defining condition.

AIDS-defining conditions are certain cancers and illnesses called opportunistic infections.

Opportunistic Infections
These infections happen more often or are more severe in people who have weakened immune systems. Some common ones are:

Candidiasis. This is an infection with a fungus called candida that affects your mouth, esophagus, lower respiratory tract, or deep lung tissue.
Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP). A fungus called Pneumocystis jirovecii infects your lungs and causes cough, fever, and trouble breathing.
Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC). This bacterial infection can spread through your body, causing fever and weight loss.
Invasive cervical cancer. Cancer starts in your cervix and spreads to other parts of your body.
Cytomegalovirus. This virus can cause problems in your lungs, belly, brain, and eyes.
Kaposi’s sarcoma. Tiny blood vessels grow where they shouldn’t. You might have skin lesions or problems with your lungs, intestines, or lymph nodes.
Lymphoma. This is cancer of your lymph nodes or other tissues of the lymph system.
Tuberculosis. Bacteria cause infection in your lungs and sometimes other parts of your body.
Salmonella septicemia. This is a severe form of salmonella infection in which the bacteria overload your immune system.

Types and Strains of HIV

There are two main types of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) -- HIV-1 and HIV-2. Both can lead to AIDS. However, they're very different from each other.

HIV-1 is the most common type. When you hear the term "HIV," it's probably HIV-1.

HIV-2 occurs in a much smaller number of people, mostly in West Africa. In the U.S., it makes up only 0.01% of all HIV cases, and those are primarily people from West Africa. It's harder to transmit HIV-2 from person to person, and it takes longer for the infection to turn into AIDS.

Both HIV-1 and HIV-2 have multiple groups within them. Those groups branch out even further into subtypes, or strains.

HIV constantly makes copies of itself. Some strains multiply faster and can be passed from person to person more easily than others.

Your doctor can treat your HIV better if they know what strain you have. A blood test can tell you. The same test also can tell if certain HIV drugs won't work well for you.

Groups of HIV-1
HIV-1 has four groups -- one large one and three much smaller ones.

Group M (Major)
This group is responsible for the HIV epidemic. Nearly 90% of all HIV-1 cases stem from this group.

The group has nine named strains: A, B, C, D, F, G, H, J, and K. Some of these have sub-strains. Researchers find new strains all the time as they learn more about HIV-1 group M.

The B strain is the most common in the U.S. Worldwide, the most common HIV strain is C.

Scientists haven't done much research on strains other than B, so information on the rest is limited. The drugs that treat the B strain (antiretroviral drugs) also work on most others.

Groups N, O, and P

The smaller HIV-1 groups are rare outside of west central Africa, specifically Cameroon. They are:

N (New, Not-M, or Not O group): This form of the virus has only been seen in a small group of people in Cameroon. Researchers haven't named any strains for this group because there are so few cases of it.
O (Outlier group): This group has almost as many variations as the M group. However, researchers haven't identified its separate strains yet because it's so rare.
P group: This is the newest group of HIV-1. It was given its own name because of how different it is from the M, N, and O strains.

What Are the Symptoms of HIV?

HIV infection happens in three stages. Without treatment, it gets worse over time and eventually overpowers your immune system. Your symptoms will depend on your stage

First Stage: Acute HIV Infection Symptoms
Most people don't know right away when they've been infected with HIV. But they may have symptoms within 2 to 6 weeks after they’ve gotten the virus. This is when your body's immune system puts up a fight. It's called acute retroviral syndrome or primary HIV infection.

The symptoms are similar to those of other viral illnesses, and they're often compared to the flu. They typically last a week or two and then go away. Early signs of HIV include:

Headache
Fatigue
Aching muscles
Sore throat
Swollen lymph nodes
A red rash that doesn't itch, usually on your torso
Fever
Ulcers (sores) in your mouth, esophagus, anus, or genitals
Headache and other neurological symptoms
If you have symptoms like these and might have come into contact with someone with HIV in the past 2 to 6 weeks, go to a doctor and ask that you get an HIV test. If you don’t have symptoms but still think you might have come into contact with the virus, get tested.

Early testing is important for two reasons. First, at this stage, levels of HIV in your blood and bodily fluids are very high. This makes it especially contagious. Second, starting treatment as soon as possible might help boost your immune system and ease your symptoms.

A combination of medications (called HIV drugs, antiretroviral therapy, or ART) can help fight HIV, keep your immune system healthy, and keep you from spreading the virus. If you take these medications and have healthy habits, your HIV infection probably won’t get worse.

Second Stage: Clinical Latency Symptoms
After your immune system loses the battle with HIV, the flu-like symptoms will go away. But there’s a lot going on inside your body. Doctors call this the asymptomatic period or chronic HIV infection.

In your body, cells called CD4 T cells coordinate your immune system’s response. During this stage, untreated HIV will kill CD4 cells and destroy your immune system. Your doctor can check how many of these cells you have with blood tests. Without treatment, the number of CD4 cells will drop, and you’ll be more likely to get other infections.

Most people don't have symptoms they can see or feel. You may not realize that you're infected and can pass HIV on to others.

If you’re taking ART, you might stay in this phase for decades. You can pass the virus on to other people, but it’s extremely rare if you take your medicines.

Third Stage: AIDS Symptoms
AIDS is the advanced stage of HIV infection. This is usually when your CD4 T-cell number drops below 200 and your immune system is badly damaged. You might get an opportunistic infection, an illness that happens more often and is worse in people who have weakened immune systems. Some of these, such as Kaposi's sarcoma (a form of skin cancer) and pneumocystis pneumonia (a lung disease), are also considered “AIDS-defining illnesses.”

If you didn't know earlier that you were infected with HIV, you may realize it after you have some of these symptoms:

Being tired all the time
Swollen lymph nodes in your neck or groin
Fever that lasts more than 10 days
Night sweats
Weight loss with no obvious reason
Purplish spots on your skin that don't go away
Shortness of breath
Severe, long-lasting diarrhea
Yeast infections in your mouth, throat, or vagina
Bruises or bleeding you can't explain
Neurological symptoms such as memory loss, confusion, balance problems, behavior changes, seizures, and vision changes
People with AIDS who don't take medication live about 3 years, or less if they get another infection. But HIV can still be treated at this stage. If you start on HIV drugs, stay on them, follow your doctor’s advice, and keep healthy habits, you can live a long time.

What Is HIV Testing?

HIV testing, also called HIV screening, is the only way to know if you have the virus.

Several types of tests check your blood or other body fluids to see whether you're infected. Most can't spot HIV right away because it takes time for your body to make antibodies or for enough of the virus to grow inside you.

Importance of HIV Testing
If you have the virus, finding out quickly means you can start treatment right away so you can feel better and live a long, full life. You can also take steps so you don't pass HIV to other people.

Pregnant women should get tested because early treatment means you probably won’t pass it to your baby.

Who Should Get an HIV Test?
The CDC recommends that everyone in the United States between the ages of 13 and 64 get tested for HIV at least once.

You should be tested more often -- at least once a year -- if you’re at higher risk of getting HIV, including if you:

Have had several sexual partners since your last HIV test
Had unprotected sex with someone who is or could be HIV-positive, including someone whose sexual history you don't know
Injected drugs using a needle, syringe, or other device that someone else used first
Have had or are getting tested for tuberculosis, hepatitis, or any sexually transmitted disease, including syphilis, gonorrhea, chlamydia, or herpes
Are a sex worker
Had sex with someone who has a history of any of these things
How Do HIV Tests Work?
There are two basic ways to get HIV test results:

Laboratory tests. For these tests, a technician takes a sample of your blood and tests it. You’ll get results within a few days.

Rapid tests. These tests provide results in about 20-30 minutes. You can get them done in a community clinic or take them at home.

When to Get Tested
If you’ve had a high-risk exposure to HIV very recently, go to the emergency room or call your doctor right away. Examples include unsafe sex with someone who has HIV or if you were sexually assaulted. Emergency drugs called post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) may prevent HIV infection. You need to take them within 72 hours (3 days) after exposure. The sooner you start, the better.

If you don't get to a doctor in time to get PEP, ask your doctor about getting tested for HIV. For most types of HIV tests, you’ll need to wait 2 weeks or more after exposure to get an accurate result. You can infect others soon after you're exposed, so practice safe sex and take other precautions in the meantime.

Almost everyone who is HIV-positive has detectable levels of antibodies at 3 months. So if you test negative a month or two after your exposure, your doctor may want you to retest after 3 months to be sure.

What Is a Window Period?
Every HIV test has a different “window period.” That’s how long you need to wait after exposure until you can expect an accurate result. No HIV test can tell if you have the virus just after you’ve been exposed.

If you get tested too soon, you may get faulty results. But if you wait too long to learn if you’re HIV-positive, you can miss out on early treatment and also unknowingly spread the virus to others.

HIV Testing Types
Standard HIV blood test. This test uses blood that a technician takes from your vein and sends to a lab. It can find antibodies (proteins your immune system makes when you’ve been exposed to the virus) 23-90 days after infection.

Rapid blood test. This test looks for antibodies using a drop of blood from a prick of your fingertip. It’s about as accurate as the original antibody test, but its window period could be longer -- between 18 and 90 days. Your health care provider can do this test, or you can buy a kit that lets you mail your sample in for testing.

Antibody/antigen test. These tests look for both antibodies and an antigen, a substance the virus makes before your immune system can start making antibodies. An antibody/antigen test that uses blood taken from a vein can find HIV 18-45 days after you’re exposed to the virus.

Newer antigen/antibody combination tests (you might hear them called “fourth generation” tests) can find HIV in 99% of people who are tested within 13-42 days of exposure. This test has become the standard HIV blood test in most labs.

A rapid antibody/antigen can also be done using blood from a prick of your fingertip. A health care provider can do this test. Or you can use a mail-in kit. The window period for this test is 18 to 90 days.

Rapid oral test. You can do this quick, easy test at home. Just rub a swab in the area between your gums and teeth to collect a sample of oral fluid (it isn’t the same as saliva) for antibodies against HIV. If you’ve had the virus for a while, the rapid oral test is highly accurate. But if you have a new infection, even if you got it in the past few months, the test won’t be as reliable. The window period is 23 to 90 days.

Urine test. These also look for HIV antibodies, but they aren’t as accurate as other tests that check either your blood or oral fluid. Because it’s an antibody test, its window period is similar to that of a standard HIV test.

Nucleic acid tests (NAT). These tests look for HIV at around 10-33 days after infection. They screen for signs of the virus itself, not antibodies to it. You may also hear this called an HIV RNA or a viral load test. It uses blood taken from a vein. You probably won’t get this expensive test unless you have symptoms and the doctor thinks you have a recent infection. It’s most often used to see how people who already have HIV respond to treatment.

What to Expect With HIV Testing
For a lab test, you might need to call your doctor to schedule it. Some public health- clinics take walk-ins.

A technician will take a small blood sample and send it to a lab. Some immunoassay tests check your urine or fluids from your mouth (not saliva), but there aren't as many antibodies in these, so you may get false negatives.

With home blood tests, you prick your finger to get a small blood sample that you send to a lab. You call to get your result, and you don't have to give your name. If it's positive, the lab will also do a follow-up test to double-check.

With home oral fluid tests, you swab your upper and lower gums and test the sample in a vial. About 1 in 12 people who are infected get a false negative from this test. If it’s positive, get a lab test to confirm.

How long does it take to get HIV results?  This depends on what kind of test you had.  Rapid tests provide answers in less than a half-hour. With a standard blood test or antibody/antigen test, you should expect results in a few days. It may take several days to get results from an NAT test. Urine test results could take up to 2 weeks.

HIV Test Results
Some tests are anonymous, meaning your name isn’t tied to the result. Others are confidential: Your information is attached to the result, but it’s protected by privacy laws.

Positive test results. A positive test result means there are traces of HIV in your body. Health care providers never diagnose HIV based on a single test result. If you had a rapid test, get a standard lab test to confirm it. If you had a lab test, more detailed tests of your blood can confirm your diagnosis:

Western blot or indirect immunofluorescence assay
Antibody differentiation between HIV-1 and HIV-2
A positive HIV test doesn’t mean you have AIDS, the most advanced stage of the disease. HIV treatment can keep you from getting AIDS, so talk to your doctor right away about starting medications called antiretroviral therapy (ART). These drugs lower the amount of the virus in your body, sometimes to a point where a test can’t spot it. They also protect your immune system so your HIV infection doesn’t become AIDS.

False-positive test results. Some HIV tests have a very slight chance of giving you false results. A “false-positive” result means the test shows you have HIV when you don’t. This occasionally happens when your test detects antibodies but they’re antibodies to another infection or substance – not to HIV. Rarely, a false positive can result from a lab mix-up or misinterpretation.

The rapid oral fluid test is more likely to give you a false-positive result than other tests. If you get a positive result on a rapid oral test, your doctor will give you a blood test to confirm your diagnosis.

Negative test results. If your result is negative, you can take steps to protect yourself from HIV. They include practicing safe sex and taking medicine called pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP).

Even if your test is negative, your partner can still have the virus. Talk with them about getting tested.

It could take as long as 6 months for you to have enough antibodies to get a positive result on some tests. If it’s been 3 months or less since you might have been infected and your test result is negative, get another test at 6 months to be sure.

False-negative test results. It’s also possible to get a “false-negative” result. That means the test says you don’t have HIV, but you do. This may happen if you get tested before or early in the window period for your particular test.

It also sometimes happens in people taking antiretroviral medicine for PrEP or PEP.  Otherwise, it’s very rare to get a false negative after the window period.

Where to Get Tested
Where you get tested for HIV depends on what’s available in your area, how much you can spend, and your preferences. Among the places that offer testing are:

Health clinics and community health centers
County health departments
STD and sexual health clinics
Family planning clinics
Substance abuse treatment and prevention programs
LGBTQ+ health centers
VA medical centers
University health centers
Pharmacies
Private doctors’ offices
Testing through local health departments and college health centers is often free. Some nonprofits also offer free or low-cost testing.

If you test positive, these organizations can help you get treatment. If you test negative, they can tell you about ways to prevent HIV infection.

At-home testing kits are available online and at pharmacies without a prescription. They generally offer you access to telephone counseling before and after testing.

To find out where you can get tested, check hiv.gov or gettested.cdc.gov, or call 800-CDC-INFO (800-232-4636).

Barriers to HIV Testing
Research has shown that some people avoid getting an HIV test because they fear others’ negative attitudes about HIV. This stigma results largely from fear, outdated beliefs about how HIV is transmitted, and value judgments about people who have it.

People may think an HIV diagnosis could:

Affect their relationships with friends and family
Cause problems with housing, employment, or school
Keep them from getting health care or health insurance  
Other barriers to HIV testing include economic, cultural, and social issues such as:

Lack of access or transportation to testing
Homophobia
Racism
Discrimination against trans people
And, of course, it’s common to be afraid of getting a positive test result. But learning your status can relieve the anxiety of uncertainty.   

If you don’t feel comfortable going to your regular doctor, consider testing by a nonprofit group or community health center. Some serve particular populations, such as LGBTQ+ people. They may even offer mobile testing vans. Or you may prefer to self-test in the privacy of your home.

What Is HIV?

HIV is a virus that lives in human blood, sexual fluids, and breast milk. It weakens your immune system, so your body has a hard time fighting off common germs, viruses, fungi, and other invaders. It spreads mainly through unprotected sexual contact and sharing needles.

AIDS -- acquired immune deficiency syndrome -- is the condition that comes when your immune system stops working and you get sick because of HIV.

What Puts You at Risk for HIV?

HIV gets passed from person to person in blood, semen, pre-seminal fluid (pre-cum), fluids from the vagina and rectum, and breast milk. So you're at risk when body fluids from someone who's infected could get into and mix with yours.

Some things you do now can raise your chances of getting HIV, but you can't change things you were born with or happened in the past.

Unsafe Sex
One of the most common ways you can get HIV is by having vaginal or anal sex with someone who has HIV. You could pass HIV during oral sex, too, but that's less common. It's also risky when you don't know whether or not your partner is HIV-positive, because they could be. The more sexual partners you have, the more your odds of catching HIV go up.

Using condoms, barriers, and dental dams will help a lot to keep you safe, but they're not perfect.

Your choice of partner also matters. Having sex with someone who has a higher chance of getting (and therefore having) HIV -- a sex worker or an IV drug user, for example -- raises your chances as well.

Shared Needles
The other big risk is reusing needles, syringes, or other equipment an HIV-positive person used to inject drugs, whether they were prescribed by a doctor or illegal. You shouldn't even reuse your own.

You could also get HIV from a needle used for piercing or tattooing if it wasn't sterilized after piercing or tattooing someone with HIV.
An accidental stick from a contaminated needle or medical device could cause HIV, but that's very rare.

Alcohol and Recreational Drugs
Because these can weaken your judgment, you may be more likely to do other risky things, such as having unprotected sex.

A Sexually Transmitted Disease
An STD such as herpes, chlamydia, syphilis, or gonorrhea may cause changes in the tissue of the vagina or penis that make it easier for HIV to pass to you while you're having sex.
From Mother to Child
Mothers infected with HIV can give their baby the virus before or during birth, or by breastfeeding. This is one reason why pregnant women should get tested for HIV.

Donated Blood
It's possible if you had a blood transfusion or were given blood products before 1985. Since then, all blood in the United States and Western Europe gets tested for HIV.

Your Genes
Some people have fewer copies of a gene that helps to fight HIV. We might someday have a test that can tell you if you're more likely to get HIV and develop AIDS, but there isn't one yet.

Where Is It Widespread?

HIV is spread throught the world, but Sub-Saharan Africa (the southern part) has the greatest number of people who are infected. The World Health Organization and the United Nations' UNAIDS office estimate that more than a third of adults are infected with HIV in some areas of Africa. There are many case of HIV in South and Southeastern Asia. The numbers of people who have HIV in Eastern Europe are growing because of injection drug use.

There are two main types of the virus: HIV-1 and HIV-2. HIV-2 is most commonly found in West Africa, although places in other parts of the world are seeing it, too. HIV tests usually look for both kinds.

Who Gets It?

The infection spreads from person to person when certain body fluids are shared, usually during vaginal or anal sex, or when sharing drugs you inject. It can also be passed from dirty needles from tattoos and body piercing. It can be spread through oral sex, too, although the chance is small.

Mothers can pass HIV to their child during birth, when the baby is exposed to their infected blood, or in their breast milk. But in some areas of the developing world, it's safer for moms with HIV to breastfeed for a few months rather than to give a newborn formula with potentially contaminated water, especially if they are receiving treatment for HIV (see below).

HIV doesn't live in saliva, tears, pee, or sweat -- so it can't be spread by casual contact with these body fluids.

HIV is not as easy to get as other infectious diseases. The virus can't survive for long outside the human body; it dies quickly when the body fluid dries up. It's not spread by animals or insects. You won't find it on public surfaces like door handles or toilet seats.

All blood products used in the United States and Western Europe today are tested for HIV. Blood banks get rid of any donated blood that tests positive, so it never gets into the public supply. Someone who donates HIV-positive blood will be contacted so they can be tested by their doctor, and they won't be able to give blood again.